Thank you, Tony.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Welcome to session 609,
Developing Desktop Applications
with WebObjects.
I'm Ron Lue-Saang,
and I'm an engineer with
the WebObjects group.
So everyone that we've told,
come to session 609 and you'll find out
about desktop applications with EOF.
Now you're finally here.
This is what you came for.
So to start things off,
I want to emphasize that WebObjects
offers incredibly powerful database
connectivity for desktop applications.
It's not just about web applications.
We also offer incredibly powerful desktop
application connectivity to databases.
To that, there are two architectures
that WebObjects supports.
Two-tier architectures with Cocoa EOF,
where your Cocoa client talks
directly to your database.
We also offer three-tier
applications where,
using Java Client or
direct-to-Java Client,
your Swing-based application speaks
to a WebObjects application server,
which in turn speaks to your database.
So what you'll learn today,
I'll go over the architecture
of Cocoa EOF and some of the
functionality that it provides.
And then I'll ask Andreas Wendker
to come out and talk about
Java Client and its architecture.
So first, Cocoa EOF.
This is kind of the overview of what
layers Cocoa EOF has.
Of course, there's Cocoa and EOF,
as the name implies.
Cocoa, if you haven't heard,
is Apple's incredible technology.
It's a set of object-oriented
advanced APIs for building
Mac OS X native applications.
And then, of course, there's EOF,
our Enterprise Objects Framework.
And here I've set out
two special parts of EOF,
first being the JDBC adapter.
The JDBC adapter is what actually
connects to all of our databases.
Any database for which we have the
appropriate JDBC version 2 driver,
we can talk to that database using EOF.
The other layer there
is EO Interface Cocoa,
which actually bridges the
two worlds of EOF and Cocoa.
So in a little more detail, first Cocoa.
Cocoa and EOF work together.
The Cocoa part provides
all the application logic.
So everything that you get that you're
used to with a regular Cocoa application,
you get in Cocoa EOF.
This includes all of the cool
widgets that you're used to,
all of the views, the windows, the menus,
the matrices,
all the widgets that you're used to.
And then, of course,
the responder chain that you're
used to for receiving events,
the run loop for getting
events from the user interface,
and we even support custom views.
It's everything that you expect
from Cocoa as a Cocoa application.
Now, how does data get from Cocoa and
into EOF and back and forth?
The general idea of the data flow is,
let's say you've got an application
that displays some values in a table.
So if you edit the value in the table,
Cocoa will fire an event off to a class,
an object, in EO Interface Cocoa.
This object has already set
itself as the delegate for any
edits in the user interface.
So it gets the event.
It realizes, oh, something has changed.
I'll tell EOF about it.
And the value is then set in the business
object in EOF where you can save it or
something happens in your business logic.
And maybe something changes because
of that one change from the UI.
Well, EOF then says, something's changed.
And EO Interface Cocoa gets that
event from EOF and then pushes the
value back into the user interface,
setting the display value
in Cocoa in your UI.
So that's a pretty simple setup, right?
You've got Cocoa, you've got EOF,
and you've got EO Interface
Cocoa that bridges the two worlds.
Speaking of bridges,
we do still use the Java bridge.
If you're new to Cocoa development
or new to WebObjects,
the bridge is a cool technology
developed by Apple for allowing your
Java code to access Objective-C classes.
In the Objective-C world of Cocoa,
where Cocoa is really
implemented in Objective-C,
there's a wrapper of Java APIs so
that you can actually use NSWindow,
NSApplication, all the NSFoundation and
AppKit utilities classes in Java.
So while Cocoa is available in
Java and implemented in Objective-C,
EOF now is all Java.
In WebObjects 5,
EOF is implemented in all Java,
which is different from previous versions
where there was also a bridge for EOF.
But now that we're pure Java,
all of your custom business logic
must also be written in Java.
This works out well for you
anyway since once you've written
your business logic in Java,
you can use that business logic in
any other WebObjects application.
HTML-based applications,
Cocoa applications,
or Java Client applications,
the same business logic can move
between the three architectures.
And as I said, your custom business logic
has to be written in Java,
but your application logic,
everything that takes care
of the Cocoa interaction
with the human interface,
that can be written in
Java or Objective-C.
You still have a choice there.
Now, actually, so if you have worked with
Cocoa or WebObjects in the past,
you may think, oh, no, not the bridge.
The bridge has been kind of a
source of headaches in the past.
We don't believe it's
much of an issue anymore.
There's two main reasons for this.
The first being it's been
rewritten for Mac OS X.
It takes advantage of Java 2 on Mac OS X.
It's much better.
And the second,
most important thing is we
hardly cross the bridge.
Again, since we don't have to use
the bridge in every EOF call,
and most of the calls that
actually go across the bridge
are just in EO Interface Cocoa,
we don't use the bridge much at all.
The two worlds of EOF and
Cocoa are pretty well separated,
very well separated.
So this works out well for
stability as well as performance,
since you don't pay the hit
of morphing objects from the
Java world to Objective-C and back.
That doesn't happen
nearly as much anymore.
But it is still there,
so you need to be aware of the
different memory models between Java's,
of course,
garbage collected memory model and the
Objective-C memory model where you have
to explicitly retain or release objects.
So what that means is you can
occasionally be using a pure
Java object in your bridge Java method,
and the bridge will decide
to forget about your object.
Well, we offer some utilities,
two utility methods to help with that,
to make sure that the bridge doesn't
automatically clear out your objects.
RetainObject and ReleaseObject are
two methods in IOCocoa utilities.
And Eococoa Utilities
lives in Eointerface Cocoa.
These two methods help you do the
retain and release calls that you
would normally do in Objective-C,
except you can do them
on your Java objects now.
So back to our original
graph of Cocoa and EOF.
So there you have Cocoa,
two special parts of EOF,
the JDBC adapter and EO Interface Cocoa.
Well, of course,
EOF has more layers than just this.
We also have EO Control, EO Access,
and EO Interface in there.
And in a little more detail,
I'd like to go through
exactly what it does,
what EOF is doing here.
So the first layer there, EO Control.
EO Control is really the core of EOF.
It's what handles all
of your business logic.
It's where your business logic lives.
And as such, there's the editing context,
EO editing context, which handles,
it holds all of your business
objects for EO control.
And it maintains an object graph
of all of your business objects.
So that means it can track
changes to the objects as well
as relationships in the objects,
insert new objects, delete objects.
All of the change tracking can
be handled in EO editing context.
So that includes undo and
redo support and everything.
And of course,
EO Control is also very performant.
So we offer things like faulting,
which allows you to not fetch
your entire database into your
application when you're not
actually using all of those rows.
So that's a little brief
overview of EO Control.
We also have EO Access.
EO Access is the part
of EOF that actually
Connects to Data Sources.
And it's built, as you saw,
on an adapter architecture
where our default adapter,
the JDBC adapter,
is what talks to databases
using JDBC2 drivers.
But you can also slip in your
special adapter classes here,
your special adapter layer,
to connect using JNDI to
LDAP servers or XML adapters,
whatever custom data sources
you can come up with.
And the real functionality of EO access,
of course, is object relational mapping.
So that means mapping all of the
relational rows in your data source
to real objects in EO control.
And that mapping between the
two is held in an EO model file,
which you build with EO Modeler.
Each EO model contains a
definition of all of the
attributes of your business object,
as well as the mapping from your business
object attributes to individual columns,
let's say, in your database.
Another important layer
to EOF is EO Interface.
All the classes in this layer are
responsible for actually displaying
data in the user interface.
This is where EO Display Group lives.
EO Display Group
You'll use most.
It's our common gateway
to multiple data sources.
It wraps an array of business objects
that it gets from its data source,
which is typically an editing context.
And it handles coordinating
updates of the user interface,
getting the values from
the EOs it contains,
and setting them in your Cocoa interface.
Or actually, any widget interface,
Cocoa or Swing, as you'll see later.
So EO Display Groups work
with EO Associations for
updating the user interface,
keeping the user interface in sync
with all of your business objects.
EO Associations are the parts that
actually connect display groups
to widgets in your user interface.
So that means we've
got text associations,
for example,
to display data in your databases
that comes up as text or even dates,
numbers, so that things are formatted
properly in the user interface.
We also have other
associations for displaying,
let's say,
images in NS Image Views or handling all
the data in tables and table columns.
So the associations really keep
the display group connected
to your interface widgets.
But there are also other
associations that can connect display
groups to other display groups.
As an example,
there are Master Detail Associations.
Which can connect a master display
group in which you're fetching possibly
all of the people in your database.
And it connects that display
group to a detailed display group,
which could be displaying all of
the addresses for those people.
This means that once you've selected a
person in your persons display group,
The association will automatically tell
the detail display group to display
that person's address information.
All of these are available
just in EO Interface.
And don't let all of the
talk about Cocoa fool you.
We also keep EO Interface very
separated from the details
of any specific widget set.
It's abstracted away from all
of the details using plugins.
So you can actually use EO interface in,
In Java Client applications
as well as Cocoa applications,
it's widget set agnostic.
So why all the layer talk, though?
Well, as I said just now,
knowing that EO Interface doesn't
depend on any specific widget set code,
doesn't depend on Cocoa, let's say,
you know that when you code,
when you write code, write, let's say,
new associations,
that you can use them any
place EO Interface is used.
So new associations can be used
in Java Client or Cocoa Client.
So the plugins, though,
that do know about the
widget set specific details
live in EO Interface Cocoa.
All the plugins in this layer know
how to handle targets and actions and
know how to connect up to become data
sources or delegates of certain widgets.
They all handle certain specific tasks,
typically type morphing,
so that an image association plugin
will know that NSData coming from
EO interface can be displayed as
an NS image in an NS image view.
And it knows how to do set and get,
so set object value and object
value with Cocoa widgets.
And it also, there are many plugins that
also handle events from Cocoa.
So that they can register as delegates
for methods and as data sources.
And of course, this plugin set is
extendable to other widgets.
We know that you all have widgets
that you may like that aren't
available with the default Cocoa set.
So you can build your own NS views,
custom views, your own custom widgets,
and create a plugin for it that you
can use in your Cocoa EOF applications.
So how does everything,
how do all the layers interact when
you're actually trying to do something?
Let's take another example of
trying to fetch objects
into the user interface.
So a Cocoa widget,
I hope you can all read this actually,
a Cocoa widget will fire off an
event to the plugin that's registered
for it in EO Interface Cocoa.
The plugin sees, oh,
something's changed and
tells its association.
The association, in turn,
makes sure that the display
group qualifies for your fetch,
let's say.
The display group then goes
and tells its editing context,
gives it a new fetch specification,
and the editing context
goes to its data source,
which is the database
context in EO Access.
EO Access will fetch any new objects
that it needs to and change that raw
row data into full enterprise objects,
into your business objects.
And then any subset that's related to the
fetch will be sent to the display group.
So the display group now contains
a certain subset of the EOs in your
editing context that it fetched for.
The display group then, of course,
tells the association.
New values have come
in and the association
gets those values and hands them off to
the plugin that it's associated with.
The plugin takes the value that it's
related to and knows how to do set
and get methods in Cocoa to put the
values into your user interface.
So it's a pretty simple chain
up and down the Cocoa EOF stack,
with Cocoa at the top
and EOF at the bottom,
and that thin layer of
EO interface Cocoa in the middle.
So I'm going to ask Andreas Wendker
to come out and give a demo,
show you exactly what
Cocoa EOF applications look like.
- So here we've got a
pretty simple model.
Maybe kind of hard to read back there,
but it's based around a person and
some information about that person.
So that's the model we're going
to use in our application.
So we just go to Project Builder
and create a new project.
One of the types that you can choose
here is Cocoa EOF Application.
You go ahead and you do everything
you would with a normal project.
You name it,
you choose a place for it to live.
And then you add any
frameworks that you need.
We're going to skip frameworks
and directly add a model.
So the one we're going to choose,
the layout that we're going to
choose is a master detail layout.
All you do is you choose your main
entity and any attributes that
you'd want to show in your tables.
The master detail layout, by the way,
by default shows you a table for
your master display group and another
table for your detail display group.
You choose your master entity and your
detail entity and all the attributes
you want to show in those tables.
So we go ahead and we
build the project for you.
And as you can see,
this is really just a Cocoa application
with a few extra things in it.
We've got our main.m,
we've got our main menu.nib,
and actually we've added
a few other frameworks.
We've added Java EO Cocoa,
as well as some of the standard EOF jars
that you'll get with WebObjects 5.
Oops.
We've added our education model.
And to show you the nib,
this is the nib that we build for you,
that our assistant builds for you by
default using master detail template.
We fill in all of the details
of putting in table names,
table column names,
and labels for your forms.
And of course give you the ability to do
some of the simplest things you would do.
Add and remove objects,
fetch new objects,
and save back to the database.
You can tweak the nib and
add anything you want,
edit it any way you want.
It's really just a Cocoa nib.
So you can see Andreas is here
just beautifying some of the names.
[Transcript missing]
So remember, we've written no code,
and then all of a sudden,
we have a Cocoa application that can
talk to EOF and talk to our database,
browsing live data in our database.
Editing values, saving values,
the whole nine yards
without any code so far.
- But of course,
you're probably not gonna just sit there
and use our Assistant-built application.
You can add stuff.
You can add even other display
groups that we may have missed
from building it in our Assistant.
So you can simply drag a new
display group from EOModeler.
and wire it up in Interface Builder.
This is another one of the
beautiful things that we can do
with WebObjects that we've added.
The functionality that we've
added to Interface Builder,
being able to connect these
display groups to the widgets.
So we can choose a pop-up and
connect it to person type.
So we can now choose from a pop-up
list what type of person we're editing.
So we can edit the person.
And as you can see,
you can actually traverse relationships,
so person to person type.
And notice that
Andreas hasn't recompiled.
You may be aware of the test interface
functionality of Interface Builder.
Well,
you can still use that with Cocoa EOF.
No more recompiling, simply run it,
right?
Back to the slides.
So I'll hand it off to Andreas now,
and he'll talk a little
bit about Java Client.
Thanks, Andreas.
ANDREAS WENKER: Thank you, Ron.
So my name is Andreas Wendker,
and I'm the manager of the
WebObjects rapid development team.
And I'm going to use the rest
of the session to introduce you
to our Java client technology.
So Java Client is another technology
inside WebObjects you can use
to develop desktop applications.
It has a lot of things in
common with Cocoa and EUF,
but there are also a
couple of differences.
One of these differences is that
Java Client is implemented in pure Java.
For the user interface,
we use the Java Foundation Classes,
or Swing, and that basically makes
Java Client platform independent
in the sense that it runs on all
platforms that support JDK 1.3.
The other important difference
between Java Client and
Cocoa EUF is that Java Client
uses a three-tier architecture,
not a two-tier architecture.
So we have a client that
displays the user interface
and interacts with the user.
We have a server that
accesses the database,
and we have a database
that stores the data.
Now,
it's important to know that the client
never directly accesses the database.
All the database access
goes through the server,
so the server has full control
over what the client can do with
the database and what it can't do.
The other thing interesting
about Java Client is that it
uses HTTP as the communication
protocol between client and server.
So you basically get the connectivity of
an HTML application running in a browser.
You can access the server
from anywhere in the world,
but you get a much richer user interface.
Let's take a look at what we have
to do with the architecture to
make this work with Java Client.
You already know that instead of Cocoa,
we use Java Client.
Out with Cocoa, and in, sorry,
I said we use Swing.
In with Swing.
Using Swing also means that we
need to use a new plugin layer.
We have this plugin layer that
connects the Interface layer and Cocoa,
and we have a new plugin
layer that connects the
Interface layer and JFC Swing.
This new layer is called
EU Interface Swing.
I also mentioned that we don't
access the database directly anymore.
So we don't use EU access
into the JDBC adapter.
Instead, we use a layer that we call
EU distribution that takes care
of connecting to the server.
Also, for your convenience,
we added another layer.
It's called EU Application.
I'll talk more about it in a minute.
Something you should notice is that the
EU Control and the EU Interface layer
stay the same in both architectures.
Code that you write against the
EU Interface or the EU Control layer,
that mostly means your business logic,
can be used in both architectures.
Now let's take a look at these new
layers in a little more detail.
The EU application layer exists
because Swing doesn't offer us all
the functionality that Cocoa gives us.
Swing is a relatively plain widget set.
It has a lot of user interface
elements like text fields,
buttons, windows,
but it doesn't help you a lot
with higher level tasks like
simply starting your application.
Or tasks like implementing
a document management,
maybe managing user defaults,
or handling menus.
We created the application layer
to help you out with these tasks.
It's a layer that provides you a
lot of utilities that you can use
to manage your user interface.
And another very important feature of
the application layer is that we added
the ability to load interface files
that you created in Interface Builder.
That's actually pretty cool because you
can use the same tool to create user
interfaces for both Cocoa applications
as well as Java Client applications.
There's just a little problem
with that because out of the box,
Interface Builder doesn't allow
you to edit Swing lib files,
right?
You can only edit
Cocoa or Carbon lib files.
So how do we deal with that?
Well, we ordered an extension that
translates a Cocoa interface
file into a Swing interface file,
right?
You don't really see this translation.
It just happens for you
whenever you save your lib file.
But what it means is that you
can create the interface in
Interface Builder and then use it
in the Java Client application.
And we will show you how that looks.
Now let's talk about
the distribution layer.
The distribution layer replaces the
EU access layer as the data access layer.
So clients fetch business objects,
not from the database, but they fetch the
objects from the server.
And if they have changes
that they want to save,
they also save the changes
through the server.
And on top of exchanging
business objects,
the distribution layer gives
you a convenient API to do
remote method invocations.
So if you have something that you
need for your client application to
deal with some kind of resources or so
that is independent of business logic,
the distribution layer has an API that
you can use to contact the server.
So the complete picture
then looks like that.
So there are a lot of boxes,
but the important piece is that we
basically pushed the EU Access layer
and the JDBC adapter to the server side.
And the server is actually a pretty
normal WebObjects application.
We use eVaccess and JDBC adapter
to access the database.
We have eO-Control to
manage business logic.
We have WebObjects to deal
with things like sessions.
And we also have a server-side
component for the distribution layer,
which plugs into WebObjects
and makes sure the Java client
works fine with WebObjects.
Something that is very interesting
about our distribution layer is
that it uses a copy distribution
mechanism for business objects.
That's very different from what most
other technologies for three-tier use.
Most other technologies use
some kind of a client stub.
What that means is that the client
business object is just some kind
of an extension to the object
that really lives on the server,
and the client has to ask the
server for every little detail.
So there's a lot of
communication going on.
In our distribution layer,
business objects are actually
copied when they are fetched
from the server to the client,
and they live as fully functional
objects on the client side.
I think a good way to think
about Java Client is that editing
contexts on the client side behave
like a nested editing context
to an editing context living in
the session on your server side.
What does that mean?
Well,
those of you familiar with EOF probably
know that an EO editing context,
which I, by the way,
abbreviated with EC in this diagram,
is just a special form
of an object store.
An object stores have parents.
The parent object store is
the object that is really
responsible for providing data.
In the normal case,
if you're just on the server,
if you write an HTML-based application,
the parent object stuff in editing
context is a database context,
abbreviated DC in this diagram.
With Java Client,
we introduced a new type of object store,
which is called the
Distributed Object Store,
DOS.
The Distributed Object Store lives
on the client side,
and its task is to connect the editing
contexts on your client side to the
editing contexts on your server side.
So as you can see from this diagram,
the only way for your business objects
or your business data to get from the
client into the database is through
the editing context on the server side.
And that's where you
have all the control.
So you can control exactly
what goes to the database.
Let's take another look at
this diagram just quickly.
I want to point out again that the
control layer that's really important is
used on both sides of the architecture.
Now with Java Client,
you have the choice to either
use the same identical business
logic on both client and server,
or you can use what we call
petition business logic.
Petition business logic means that the
implementation of your business logic,
of your business objects on
client and server is different.
And it can be different in two ways.
You can limit the visibility
of properties to the server so
that you don't even send to the
client what you don't want to see.
And also you can use
different implementations
for the two business objects.
So you can actually force the client to
make roundtrips to the server and use
an implementation it provides there.
That adds a lot of value
to your application,
and it adds value in two areas,
in the area of security and
in the area of performance.
I think the area of security
is pretty obvious because you
don't send any data to the client
that you don't want it to see,
and you don't even send compiled
code to the client that you
don't want it to know about.
Because since we use Java,
you will know that the code can
actually be pretty easily decompiled.
So if you have code that you
consider secure or secret,
and you don't want to
send it to the client,
But then you can keep it
on the server and force the
client to invoke the head code.
The other area is performance.
Business Project Petitioning helps
you with performance because if
you have the great server with 500
processors and lots of gigahertz,
then you can make your clients use the
high computing power of your server.
Today, that probably doesn't matter
that much anymore because
most clients are fast enough.
But more importantly,
you can use business logic to avoid
that too much data is transferred
between client and server.
You can minimize the amount of
communication between client
So if you have an algorithm,
some kind of computation that
requires you to look at a lot of data,
but you don't really want to
display that data on the client,
you just want to display the entries out,
then the right thing to do is to
execute that computation on the server,
fetch the objects that you need for
the computation only on the server,
and then just send the entries out,
which is much smaller.
With Java Client,
you have two different options to deploy.
You can deploy the
client as an application,
as a full desktop application
with an icon that you can
double-click on the desktop,
or you can deploy as an applet embedded
in some HTML running inside a browser.
I would like to take a moment and
compare these two options for you.
The most compelling advantage of
the applet is the simplicity of the
installation process because there
is basically no installation process.
When applets start,
they download all the classes that
they need to execute the program
from the server side and then execute
the program inside the browser.
With applications,
you have to install a start program on
the client machine and all the classes
that you need to execute the client.
So you have to give your end users
some kind of an installer that just
puts the application on the desktop.
Now,
if you want to upgrade your application,
you get into a lot of trouble.
So if you have some bug fixes,
you get in a lot of trouble with
desktop applications because now
you have to make sure that all your
clients install the new version.
With Applets,
that's so much easier because you
just upgrade it on the server.
The next time the client launches,
the new classes are downloaded and
the client has automatically updated.
Nevertheless,
applications score much higher
in the area of user experience.
It's just so much nicer for users to
start an application from the desktop,
to not have to wait 30 seconds until
all the classes are downloaded,
and to have an application
that is actually fully embedded
in your desktop environment.
Applications you can hide,
you can minimize windows,
you have access to service menus,
et cetera.
You don't have that with Appless.
You will also find that applications
perform a little better than applets,
and the reason is that
they are very isolated.
Applications run as standalone processes,
while applets,
all the applets running in one browser,
share the VM, the other code.
That can have all kinds of
negative side effects on both
performance as well as stability.
From your perspective as the developer,
applications also have the
advantage that you don't have to
deal with security restrictions.
In Applets,
there's a security manager installed
which prevents the application,
the program,
from accessing your file system,
from accessing certain system parameters.
You don't have to deal with
that in an application.
So if you have the need to store
something in the file system,
it's much easier for you to
do that as an application.
But the users might see
that a little different.
That's why I've got a little
dot here in this diagram.
From the user's perspective,
applets are usually
executed as untrusted code.
And the Java VM ensures that the
program can't mess with the computer.
So users might see that a
little different than you.
But we think that in the environments
where you install Java Client,
where you use Java Client applications,
which is mostly intranet,
it probably doesn't matter so
much because your user should
trust the system administrator.
that the software is a good software.
Another advantage that might come in
handy with applications is that you have
full control over all the VM parameters.
Let's say you need a
very large heap size.
You can adjust the heap size with
an application because you have
control over the start program.
You can't in applets.
So now I would like to ask
Ron to come out and give you
a demo of our Java client.
We are basically going to create the same
application that we created with Cocoa,
the Java Client.
So we go into Project Builder,
we create a new project,
choose a different kind of project type,
give it a different name.
Then we add some frameworks.
This time we actually do add a framework.
It's called Java Client Class Loader.
It's just for the demo purposes.
It's not part of WebObjects 5.
It just makes our demos here really easy.
So we choose the same model.
Thank you for your time.
I hope you did for Cocoa.
And then there's something interesting.
This is different than in Cocoa.
It asks us for a so-called
interface controller class.
The interface controller class is a class
that we generate in the Assistant and
it's a very convenient class for you
that helps you to manage user interfaces
and to especially load interface files.
So the Assistant creates,
for every interface file that you create,
you also create an
interface controller class.
Now we will do the same thing.
The rest of the system
is basically the same.
We choose the master detail layout.
Choose person as the main entity.
Last name, first name, person type,
table.
Last name and first name
for the form attributes.
We choose addresses as the
relationship we want to display.
And we pick a few attributes that
we want to display in the table
for the addresses and in the form.
And that's it.
So this project now looks a little more
complicated than the one for Cocoa.
The reason is that now we have
a full WebObjects application.
So we have all the components that,
you know, we are familiar with
from the server side.
And actually, projects with WebObjects
have two different targets.
One is the application server target,
the other one is the web server target.
The application server target
contains all the objects and resources
that you need on the server side,
the web server target,
the ones for the client side.
And these little donuts
here on the left side,
they basically show you to
which target a file belongs.
So as you can see,
we have a normal application,
we have an application class,
a session class, a direct action class.
And if you look inside
the main.vod for a second,
you can see that
We can see that we use a VoJava
Client Applet and we specify the
interface controller class name here,
which is the interface we want to load.
So this is our connection
from Java Client,
from the client side, into the server,
that we use a special
class VoJava Client Applet.
Now let's take a look at the client side.
- So there are two files.
There's the code,
the Java Client Interface
controller class,
and there's the interface file,
why don't we open that in ID.
So it's basically the same interface
file that we had for Cocoa,
and Ron is going to beautify it again.
- So we give the vendor a better title.
We modify a few of the labels.
That's all I have to do.
Be safe.
Now we go back to Project Builder
and actually compile it.
This will take a little longer than with
Cocoa because now we have a client and
a server side that needs to be compiled.
Okay, and Ron is now starting the
server side of the application.
The nice thing about this little
framework that we added is
that it hard codes some of the
port numbers we want to use,
and it allows us to use a little
start program that we wrote,
which is our Java Client Launcher,
and then we can just enter the URL,
and it happens to be the right one,
and now our client
connects to the server.
And this is the client application.
So as you can see,
it looks pretty similar
to what we had with Cocoa.
We have a table, we can enter values,
we can change values.
It just behaves the same way.
and all that without writing code.
Okay, we want to show you,
If you want to just
show you something else.
In earlier releases of WebObjects,
the slip-fetch installation
had a bunch of problems.
It's still a little problematic because
there are these two different worlds,
Cocoa and Swing,
and they don't always match exactly.
But we think that Interface Builder
is really the greatest tool on the
planet to create user interfaces.
And it's especially the only tool
that allows us to set up connections.
And in UAF, we really need connections.
We need to set up all these associations.
So Interface Builder is really the best
choice for us to generate interfaces.
And with WebObjects 5,
you try to fix all the bugs and...
We would like to show that to you
by just overlaying the interface
file and the running application,
and then minimizing the
window in the interface files.
As you can see--
As you can see, it maps pretty well.
There are a few differences,
just maybe Swing draws the text one pixel
higher in a button than Cocoa does or so.
But basically,
if you overlay the two Nib files,
it looks pretty much the same.
OK.
Can we go back to the slides, please?
With Java Client,
we also have a technology we
call Direct-to-Java Client.
Direct-to-Java Client
is an infrastructure
that helps you developing
Java Client applications
very easily and very rapidly.
It does so by providing you with
a lot of predefined application
functionality that you can make use of.
And it relieves you from the burden
to create user interfaces by hand.
Instead, it actually generates the user
interfaces dynamically for you.
And it does that by analyzing the
EU model and coming up with a good
scheme to display and edit your data.
And we would actually like to give
you a short demo about that as well.
We will have a full session
about it later this afternoon,
but we'd like to show
it to you here as well.
So if you could go back
to the demo machine.
So we go back to Project Builder again.
We create a new project.
Choose a different project type.
This time it's direct to Java Client.
And we give it a better name.
We will add our little Java Client
class loader framework,
just so that our demos are easy.
And we choose the same model again.
And the last option is to build
and launch the application
automatically for us.
So Ron,
if you expand all the groups again.
So you see there's still
a WebObjects application.
The one thing that is different about it
is that if you go to the main.bot again,
It now uses another application class.
It's the EU Dynamic Application.
That's just a special class that
makes sure that your client does
something sensible even if you
didn't give it any interface file.
As you can see here,
there is not a single
interface file defined.
There's actually not a single
file related to the client
that you have to create.
So the program automatically
compiled and launched for us.
And now we will use our Java Client
Launch again to connect.
And the reason why this works so simple
is that we have this little framework.
This is the application we get.
As you can see, this application here has
a little more complex UI.
We have query interface for
persons and departments.
We see much more entities in our model.
We can search for persons
and then we can open them.
If you open them,
you get detailed windows.
Why don't you make that?
And maybe you can switch
around to addresses,
phone numbers.
So as you can see,
with just a very few steps,
we were able to create a fairly
complex UI that allows us to browse
the whole database and display and
edit all the values in your database.
Okay, thank you, Ron.
And I think -- oops,
can we go back to the slides, please?
Before we go into question and answers,
I would like to take a moment
and compare the two technologies
that we introduced to you.
Ron introduced the two-tier
Cocoa EOF applications,
and I talked about the three-tier
Java Client applications.
What are the differences?
Well,
Cocoa is a Mac OS X only technology.
So Cocoa EOF applications you
can only deploy on Mac OS X.
With Java Client,
you're basically platform independent.
You just need a platform
that supports the JDK 1.3.
But if you want to give your users the
optimal user experience on Mac OS X,
you would have to use Cocoa.
Platform independent,
but that also means it's not
specially designed for the Mac.
So if you want the best user
experience for your users on Mac OS X,
then you have to use Cocoa.
Java Client and Swing still gives
you very good user experience,
and especially with all
these optimizations that
Steve Nero's team is working on,
the applications get faster and faster,
and it's really hard to,
it starts to get really hard
to distinguish Cocoa and Swing.
When it comes to deployment,
you have to have an installation on the
client machine with Cocoa applications.
With Java Client,
you have two different options.
You can deploy as an
application or as an applet.
We usually recommend to deploy as
an application because the user
experience is so much better,
the performance is a little better,
and you can tune all the parameters,
but you have both options.
From the administration perspective,
Cocoa applications, you know,
it's like every other
desktop application.
The Java client is a little
more complicated because now
you suddenly have two things.
You have a server that
you need to administer,
you need to make sure
that it performs well,
and you have to have,
and you have a client.
So it's a little more complicated,
a little more work for you.
Performance of
Cocoa applications is just fine.
The performance of Java Client
applications is still fine,
but you have to make sure that you
partition your business logic correctly
so that the communication between client
and server doesn't become a bottleneck.
Also, with Swing,
the user interface is a little
more sluggish than Cocoa.
I personally don't think it matters.
It's really close enough.
When it comes to security,
Cocoa applications you can only use in
the intranet because the application
directly accesses your database.
You don't want to give that to
anybody outside your company.
Java Client gives you all the
tools you need to make your
clients or your database secure,
but there are still these complications
with either installing the application or
you face this 30-second at least download
time of classes if you deploy a snaplet.
So that's why we think it's not
really a technology that is suitable
for high-traffic internet sites.
And Java Client is also
mostly an intranet technology.
The reason why I wrote Intranet++
is that since you have all the
tools to make it secure enough,
you can actually use it in what
I call controlled environments.
So let's say you're a software company,
you have a bug tracking system
where you lock all your bugs,
and you have a few customers,
a few preferred customers,
that you want to give a direct
login into your database.
It makes perfect sense to give
them a Java Client application.
But as I said, it has to be a controlled
environment because of the
installation complications.
Okay, so we still have some time, but...
We care a lot about desktop applications.
We care so much about it that we give
you two technologies to implement them.
We introduce to you the
Cocoa UF applications,
which are two-tier, and we introduce
Java Client applications,
which are three-tier.
With both architectures,
you get incredibly powerful database
connectivity for your desktop apps.
Something to keep in mind is that
the business logic code you write
can be used in all architectures.
It can be used in Java Client,
it can be used in Cocoa,
and it can be used in a
WebObjects HTML application.
Who has not seen that?
Good.
The sessions I recommend to you related
to this topic are session number 606,
later this afternoon,
about direct-to-Java client,
and number 614 tomorrow,
advanced Java client.